{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;\red255\green10\blue17;\red39\green81\blue255;
\red22\green70\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww28580\viewh17920\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Syllabus for MATH 2321, Calculus 3 for Science and Engineering
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Northeastern University, Fall 2015\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 INSTRUCTOR
\b0 : Chris Kottke\
\

\b CONTACT INFO
\b0 : office: 544 Lake Hall    e-mail: c.kottke@neu.edu\
\

\b OFFICE HOURS
\b0 :  TBA\
\

\b TEXTBOOK
\b0 : 
\i Worldwide Multivariable Calculus,
\i0  by David B. Massey\
\
PDF and printed versions available at:{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.centerofmath.org/textbooks/multicalc/index.html"}}{\fldrslt  http://www.centerofmath.org/textbooks/multicalc/index.html}}\
\
The PDF is priced at $9.95, while the black and white (grayscale) soft-back printed version is $29.95. The PDF textbook contains a link, at the beginning of each section, to one or more free video lectures, by Prof. Massey, on the contents of that section. The PDF has hyperlinked Tables of Contents, Indices, and cross-references; you may need to activate the Forward and Back buttons in your PDF viewer to take full advantage of the hyperlinks. To use the textbook on an iPad, we recommend the free Adobe Reader app. \
\
It is absolutely 
\b NOT
\b0  required that you purchase a printed textbook.\
\

\b WEB MATERIALS
\b0 :  I do 
\b not
\b0  use Blackboard for posting materials online. Class materials may be found on my own web site: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.northeastern.edu/ckottke/2321/"}}{\fldrslt http://www.northeastern.edu/ckottke/2321/}}\
\

\b HOMEWORK AND QUIZZES
\b0 : Homework will be assigned daily, but will not be collected.  At the beginning of class each Thursday (other than the first Thursday and the Thursdays of the midterm exams), there will be a short quiz taken verbatim from homework exercises from the previous Wednesday, Thursday, Monday. Homework assigned on the day before the quiz will 
\b not
\b0  be on that Thursday's quiz. We will not have time to go over all homework questions in class. Thus, if you have a lot of questions on the homework, it will be essential for you to come to my office hours, make special appointments to see me, go to our TA\'92s office hours, or go for tutoring in the Mathematics Department or in the College of Engineering.\
\

\b MIDTERMS AND FINAL EXAMS:
\b0  here will be two midterm exams, and a final exam in this course. The midst-term exams are 65-minute in-class exams; they will be on Thursday, Oct. 15 and Thursday, Nov. 19. On the midterm exams and final exam, you may use one 8.5x11\'94 one-sided sheet of notes.\
\
The final exam date is to be determined. 
\b Check for exam schedule conflicts before Oct. 1
\b0 .\
\

\b SNOW DAYS
\b0 : If classes are cancelled due to snow, or for other official reasons, any scheduled quiz or midst-term exam will occur on the next class meeting.\
\

\b GRADING
\b0 : The course grade will be determined as follows:\
Final exam: 40%\
Midterm exams: 40%  (20% each).\
Quizzes: 20%. I will drop your worst quiz grade.\
\
Letter grades are determined numerically\
\
A \uc0\u8805 \'a093 ,    92 \u8805  A-  \u8805  90,      89 \u8805   B+ \u8805  87,    86 \u8805   B \u8805  83,     82 \u8805  B-  \u8805  80,      79 \u8805   C+ \u8805  77,    76 \u8805   C \u8805  73,     72 \u8805   C-  \u8805  70,    69 \u8805   D+ \u8805  67,    66 \u8805   D \u8805  63,     62 \u8805   D-  \u8805  60,      F \u8804  59\
\
The total numerical grade for the course (0.4*Final + 0.2*Midterm1 + 0.2*Midterm2 + 0.2*Quizzes) will be curved by median adjustment (adding an overall constant to bring the median up to a B-, if necessary) at the end of the semester. Individual quizzes and exams will not be separately curved, though I will give you some idea of how the curve is looking as the semester progresses.\
\
\

\b COURSE TAs:\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Jonier Antunes, 575 LA, office hours: MWF 1:30-2:30pm\
\
Vasileios Aravantinos-Sotiropoulos, 527 NI, office hours: W 6-7pm and F 9-11am\
\
Xu Sun, 563 LA, office hours: TTh 4:45-6:15pm\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 RECITATION SESSIONS:
\b0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 Mondays, 5-6:40pm, 11 KA, Xu Sun\
\
Tuesdays, 1:35-3:15pm, 19 International Village, Vasileios Aravantinos-Sotiropoulos\
\
Wednesdays, 2:50-4:30pm, 291 RY, Jonier Antunes\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
\b0 : \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Mathematics Department Tutoring Center is in Room 540B, Nightingale Hall. This peer tutoring is free. Peer Tutoring appointments can be booked via MyNEU under TUTORING. Although you can walk in, it is really best to sign up in advance. Tutoring requests are scheduled by students in real-time and confirmed by email. Next-day appointments must be booked by 9:00 pm the previous day. It is expected that tutoring services in the Mathematics Department Tutoring Center will begin shortly after the start of classes. See {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.northeastern.edu/csastutoring/setting-up-appointments/"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 http://www.northeastern.edu/csastutoring/setting-up-appointments/}} For more information about peer tutoring.\
\'a0\
The College of Engineering also provides tutoring for Calculus. See {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.coe.neu.edu/coe/undergraduate/studentservices/tutoringinCOE.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 http://www.coe.neu.edu/coe/undergraduate-s}}\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 upport/tutoring\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone  for details.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
The PDF textbook contains links at the beginning of each section to online full-length, free, video lectures on the contents of that section. These videos can also be accessed directly by going to: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.centerofmath.org/videos/index.html#subject5"}}{\fldrslt http://www.centerofmath.org/videos/index.html#subject5}} . If there is a discrepancy between how the videos present material and how your instructor presents material, you should follow your instructor\'92s presentation, but you should discuss the matter with your instructor.\
\
An independent video-tutoring company, Kahn Academy, has produced a large collection of free, short video tutorials and examples on many topics, including Calculus; the url is {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.khanacademy.org/"}}{\fldrslt http://www.khanacademy.org/}} . If there is a discrepancy between how the videos present material and how your instructor presents material, you should follow your instructor\'92s presentation, but you should discuss the matter with your instructor.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 ISSUES WITH THE COURSE/INSTRUCTOR
\b0 : If you have issues with this course and/or instructor which you are not comfortable discussing with your instructor, you should contact the Teaching Director, Prof. Massey, at  d.massey@neu.edu  .\

\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Schedule of Topics and Suggested Homework Exercises
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \
\
Week 1 (partial): Sept. 9-11
\b0 \
\
Review \'a71.2  R^n as a vector space  #1,  3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 13-16, 19-21, 23-24, 27, 29, 33, 36, 41-43, 45, 46  +  \'a71.3 Dot product, angles, and orthogonal projection  #1-4, 9-12, 17-19, 22, 23, 27-30, 33-35, 45-48\
\
Review \'a71.4 Lines, planes, and hyperplanes  #1-4, 9-12, 13-17, 19, 21-23, 27-30  +  \'a71.5 Cross product  #1-4, 9-12, 17-20, 27-29, 31, 35, 37, 41\
\
\
\

\b Week 2: Sept. 14-18\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 Review \'a71.6 Functions of a single variable  #1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 18, 19, 21-25, 29, 33-35\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \'a71.7 Multivariable functions  #1, 2, 4, 7-10, 15, 17-19, 21, 27, 28\
\
\'a71.8 Graphing surfaces  #1-10, 11-15, 19, 20, 23, 25\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 3: Sept. 21-25\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\'a72.1 Partial derivatives  #1, 2, 5, 7, 13, 16, 18, 19, 22, 27, 29, 32, 34\
\
\'a72.3 Linear approximation, tangent planes, and the differential   #1, 3, 5, 6, 11, 12, 15, 17, 22, 23\
\
\'a72.4 Differentiation rules  #1-4, 8, 19, 20, 23, 25, 27, 31, 32\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 4: Sept. 28-Oct. 2
\b0 \
\
\'a72.5 Directional derivatives  #1, 3, 5-7, 11-13, 19-21, 25-27, 33-35, 37\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Tuesday, Sept. 29: last day to withdraw without a W
\b0 \cf0 \
\
\'a72.7 Level sets and gradient vectors  #1-3, 7-13, 17, 18, 21, 24\
\

\b \cf3 Thursday, Oct. 1: last day to file a final exam conflict form
\b0 \cf0 \
\
\'a72.8 Parameterizing surfaces  #1-3, 5, 9-11, 17-19, 21, 29, 30\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 5: Oct. 5-9
\b0 \
\
\'a72.9 Local extrema  #1-6, 9-14, 17-20, 35\
\
\'a72.10 Optimization  #1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 17, 19, 20\
\
\'a72.11 Lagrange multipliers #1, 3, 12, 13, 15, 19, 23, 27, 29\
\

\b \
Week 6 (partial): Oct. 12-16\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Monday, Oct. 12: Columbus Day - no classes\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 Review\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf4 Test 1
\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 7: Oct. 19-23
\b0 \

\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \'a73.1 Iterated integrals  #1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 16, 17-24,  27, 28
\b \
\

\b0 \'a73.2 Integration in R^2  #1-3, 6-8, 17, 18, 23, 24, 27-29, 31-33\
\
\'a73.3 Polar coordinates #1-7, 17\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 8: Oct. 26-30
\b0 \
\
\'a73.4 Integration in R^3 and R^n  #1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16-18, 20
\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\'a73.5 Volume  #1-3, 9-11, 17, 18\
\
\'a73.6 Cylindrical and spherical coordinates  #1-3, 7-9, 13-15, 19-21, 25-27, 31, 32, 35, 36\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 9: Nov. 2-6\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\'a73.8 Density and mass  #1, 2, 7-10\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \'a73.11 Surfaces and area  #1-3, 9, 11-13, 15-17, 19-21\
\
\'a74.1 Vector fields  #1, 3, 7, 8-14, 17, 18, 21, 22, 26-28\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 10: Nov. 9-13
\b0 \
\
\'a74.2 Line integrals  #1-3, 7, 8, 15, 16, 18-20, 23, 25, 27\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Wednesday, Nov. 11: Veterans\'92 Day - no classes
\b0 \cf0 \
\
\'a74.3 Conservative vector fields (1st day) #1-3, 7-9, 15-17, 23, 24, 27, 33, 35, 41, 43
\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 11: Nov. 16-20\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\'a74.3 Conservative vector fields (2nd day) #1-3, 7-9, 15-17, 23, 24, 27, 33, 35, 41, 43
\b \

\b0 \
Review\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf5 Test 2
\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 12 (partial): Nov. 23-27\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \'a74.4 Green\'92s Theorem  #1, 3, 5, 7-9, 13, 15 
\b \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Wednesday, Nov. 25-27: Thanksgiving break - no classes
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 13: Nov. 30 - Dec. 4\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \'a74.5 Flux through a surface  #1, 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 19, 20\
\
\'a74.6 The Divergence Theorem   #1-4, 6-11
\b \

\b0 \
\'a74.7 Stokes\'92 Theorem   #1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 10, 17\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Week 14 (partial): Dec. 7-9
\b0 \
\
Review\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Thursday, Dec. 10: last day to withdraw with a W\cf0 \
\
Thursday, Dec. 10: reading day\
\
Friday, Dec. 11- Friday, Dec 18: final exams}